



Else: 
The Power of 
Giving Everything


Give Everything 

Hey there, my name is Nikhil. I just turned 20 years old and don’t know what I want to do with my life. All I do know is I want to live up to a certain standard, defined by that which constitutes the person I want to become. Also, I want what I live for to be worth dying for. Currently, my goal is to make the world a better place, measured by the prevalence of genuine smiles.

The goal of writing this book is to act as a checkpoint of the current ideals and lessons that I value. I’m not sure if I will share this information as I am doubtful of the utility of the philosophical commentary of a person my age.

My fundamental claim is that human beings are their strongest when they give everything to that which they love; and, hope to solidify this claim through the lessons in the coming pages. To preface the reader, I’d like to note that this text will have imperfections: some of the ideas might contradict each other, others might be the combination of disconnected thoughts, etc. 
The goal of each page is to try and explain a value I hold dear as well as why I choose to do so. Thus, the aggregate of these thoughts represents the current value system I strive to abide by, which is inherently imperfect. Despite these imperfections, I hope that you at least take away the mantra of this book which also serves as the foundation to my value system: Give Everything. 

I would first like to define what “everything” means to me. In this context, I define “everything” as every ounce of your soul. I believe that by giving everything, you develop confidence in your abilities which becomes the catalyst for making a lasting impact on this world. In a more dramatic way, it will take everything you have to stand up to the scary things in life so the people you love don’t have to; and, doing scary things now prepares you for the scarier things in the future. Thus, I believe you should put everything you have into what you choose to do; and by proxy, who you choose to become. 

The second part is to “give”. I believe every human being is born with an infinite potential of both “good” and “evil” (define those as you please). Furthermore, I think we realize the “good” in us by giving what we have, as opposed to taking what we want. Thus, if we can give everything we have, then we can maximize the amount good we put into this world. Else 

If you give everything to that which is worth dying for, your life will have meaning. But what is meaning? Meaning is the self-perception of how much we value something. In the context of our lives, I believe meaning is a direct byproduct of what we choose to devote ourselves to. While I don’t have an answer to that question yet, I choose to define the following who, what, when, where, why, and how of the person I want to become: 

What else would I rather become? I believe a person’s legacy is defined not as who they are but rather what they become. This is why most people are forgotten, due to the fact that most people don’t become something worth remembering. I want to become something larger than myself while also inducing kindness and liberation into this seemingly indifferent universe.

When else but now? I refuse to become someone who becomes paralyzed when staring into the dark abyss of sacrifice that it takes to realize my dreams. I will become someone who chooses to jump without hesitation. 

Where else but in my heart? I am not sure how to explain this one. Some things just feel right because they come from the depths of who you are. I want to be guided by this feeling while also constantly growing as a person. 

Why else am I here? I choose to measure my successes by the amount of work I am proud of that also helps other people. The answer to this question drastically varies based on the person answering it, as well as where they currently are on their journeys. This variety is proof of the diversity found amongst us which I believe is something to be celebrated, not diminished . 

How else can I help? I never want to be static and hope to constantly look for new ways to challenge myself. I hope the person I become will guide this search in an altruistic direction where I grow not for myself, but for others. 

Who else can I inspire? My usual response to nihilistic perspectives is that we become less insignificant by empowering others to be less insignificant. While you are the only variable that you can control, life isn’t a “single-player game”; other people have their own dream that you can help realize. Question Your Reality

What is reality? Answering that question is above my pay-grade, but I believe a smaller, yet more important question is: what makes up our realities? 

I believe is a much more important question as we cannot feasibly contemplate all of reality. Thus, it is much more productive and manageable to improve upon what we perceive to be reality. Luckily, the answer is similarly simple where I believe our reality is what we perceive and learn to be true. However, I think very few people truly question what they perceive to be reality, leading to pitifully static perceptions of reality.

If something doesn’t feel right, think about why that may be. Sometimes, it just takes some intense staring at a problem to find a path forward. While these words could be applied to technical work, I believe taking a good look at yourself and staring into the depths of who you are brings to light that which we wish was hidden. 

After we find something that perplexes us, I believe we hold the inherent obligation to seek answers. I believe this level of questioning forms the basis of independent thought, as anything else allows for blind trust in what we perceive, learn, and accept to be reality. 

I will caution that this doesn’t mean you should question everything. Some truths are universal and as such, there are more productive ways to spend your time than questioning them. I also believe some concepts need not be questioned, and that blind trust can create more long-term happiness. One such example is love, where I believe too many people over analyze and approach love like a game where the goal is to not get hurt at any cost. Why not just enjoy it? Hedonistic Heuristic

At the risk of exposing my inner nerd, I want to take a brief moment to explain the intuition behind heuristic search. The idea is that a user can guide a search algorithm using information they deem to be relevant to the current problem space. In the case of robotic navigation, people commonly utilize distance-based heuristic functions to guide a robot towards a goal position. 

In our lives, I believe we should use hedonism as our heuristic function. Hedonism has a terrible reputation for a good reason, as it represents greed of the highest order. However, I believe this is only true if you think of short-term hedonism as opposed to using a longer time-span. In the case of “vanilla” hedonism, a hedonist will choose to perform an action which brings them temporary pleasure without regard for future consequences. 

I believe by reframing the decision as a trade between short-term pleasure and long-term results, many people can make decisions that they will be more proud of. This is especially apparent when considering the guilt people feel when making decisions that they regret. An example I often use is that many people choose to eat foods and partake in addicting activities (smoking, drinking, etc.) that ruin their bodies. However, this same group of people would be ecstatic to have a bodily physique they can be proud of. 

Thus, if you can reframe the question from “What do I want?” to “What do I want to become?”, hedonism becomes a powerful platform for decision making. This comes off as extreme, since many would argue that striving for perfection is not sustainable. However, I believe the confidence someone builds from consistently making a decision they are proud of is priceless. 

I think this framework can be used as an abstract template for all decision making we do. Assuming you want to become the dream version of yourself, ask yourself what they would do when presented with a choice. If you truly want to become that person, and you go after that version of yourself with genuine effort and passion, then I think everything will turn out alright. 

Instincts: Base Units of Who we Are

It’s ironic that so many people focus on raising their ceilings without ever considering their floors. I get why; highlights often manifest as flashy updates for which you get validation and compliments from those that you care about. The floor on the other hand is often where you spend time alone, broken, and tired. However, I want to make the argument that the instincts you revert to at your floor makes up who you are. 

Although it is ironic that people are often remembered for their highlights. No one remembers the greats for what they did in the 99% of their lives they spent on the floor; however, we cannot stop talking about the 1% of their lives. My counterpoint here is that the 1% we remember them for is due to the instincts they build in the 99%. 

But how do you build an instinct? I would like to define an instinct as a base unit (action or thought) we revert to without thought. Thus, these are the base units that make us who are are when we do not have the energy or wherewithal to properly think through what we do or say. While simple-minded, I believe we build instincts through a brute-force method. You need to actively behave as the person you want to become; and slowly, these instincts will become those that you default to. These actions will then have a trickle down effect on the way you think and carry yourself. 

I will caution to choose your instincts carefully. While some instincts sound good on paper, they often have downstream effects on the person you become that you may not want. One such example is obsession, an attribute commonly associated with the hyper-successful. However, I believe obsession is only alluring in theory. In practice, obsession requires the sacrifice of friends, moments, and memories which many regret sacrificing. 

My advice is to choose simple instincts that can serve as a platform for future growth. Instincts like standing up for those who can’t, never giving up, or choosing to be kind all are great examples which I am currently working towards. To start, choose one instinct that you feel to be right in your heart and run after it with everything that you have. 

Hunt Challenges, Don’t Chase Accomplishments

When you chase something, you only try to catch it. When you hunt something, you run with everything you have; and, you will inevitably get hungry even after catching your initial target. Also, those that enjoy the hunt inevitably go further than those who solely focus on their target.

But why choose to challenge yourself? Isn’t it easier to hit a couple milestones as you age into a peaceful, traditional life? Yes, it is easier. It is easier to swim when the currents are at your back as you wither away into the insignificance that most other people do. My most common rebuttal to this question is that I do not find solace in “peaceful”, only boredom. So, why not ruffle a few feathers and see what you can become in the time you have?

In a less dramatic way, I hope you bite into that which sharpens your teeth. I have seen many people go through their lives on a peaceful path, only to look back and regret that they had never bitten into anything. Thus, I hope you bite into challenges which force you to grow beyond yourself. 

This growth not only prepares you for the obstacles that currently lie on your path, but also for the larger obstacles that wait for your future self. More than for yourself, I would argue being able to face scary challenges with confidence allows you to be strong for that which you love. 

Romanticize the hunt, you need to enjoy the grind which helps stick to the process 

Concept of that which is timeless: clothing, habits, etc. 

Permission to suck. You will fail and you’d rather fail now rather than later when you’re working on bigger projects

Paradox of Recipes 

When starting anything, it is often best to learn from those who have already mastered this subject. In the context of cooking, this comes as following the recipes of chefs on the way to making the food that you want to make. 

In a similar way, I believe every field has a growing oasis of information out there for those who are willing to pursue it. Information can come in the form of research papers, online forums, or YouTube videos (dubbed YouTube University by a friend). There are sources of information which are behind pay-walls but the majority of information is an internet connection away. 

However, I hope you heed my previous words and question the information which you encounter. Do not blindly trust or regurgitate what you read, instead, continue thinking for yourself. I would also note to slow down and take the time to understand what you may be confused about. Do not accrue technical debt as you read through increasingly complex material by simply writing what they say word for word. 

You must use the foundational skills you practice while following recipes to do that which is originally you. You will fail, fail, and fail again. But, with each failure you will learn more than you would have if you “got ti working” by following someone else’s path. 

In each failure, my only advice is to push through. Do not fall into to the temptation of turning to the answers. I promise that the journey, skills, and people you meet while struggling make the struggle worth it. Another piece of advice which has helped me think through hard problems is to just stare at it for 10 minutes. Don’t even think about the problem, just stare at it and you may find a new path forward that you had not originally thought of. 


Look Forward, Not Down

Growing up, I have had a tendency to look down upon those with whom I disagree. Often, I would label their opinions is incorrect, or ignorant of the truth; in reality, I was the fool who never realized utility of looking forward to with someone rather than down upon them. I'm not sure where this originates from, however, in retrospect, it seems to me that people like the feeling of looking down because it reinforces that they are above others.

Do not forget that others around you have their own pride, dreams, ambitions, skills, etc. Those that go through life as a single player game are doomed to fail. As I continued to grow, I hope to start looking forward with other people to work with them to build sustainable solutions to real problems.

Notably, this “other person” could also be yourself. People often look at their past with disgust, convincing themselves that if they were placed in a previous situation that they would be impervious to any mistake. However, I don't believe this is a productive platform for growth since you assume that your past self is "wrong" without ever considering how they got to be that way. Instead, if you choose to look forward, even with your past self, I believe this constitutes a much more fruitful endeavor since you can now view your past self as a person, not a mistake or regret along your journey.

You cannot always trust others to value what you value. This stems from the foundational differences that make every human being unique. Thus, I believe this is to be celebrated; however, I also believe this is something to be mindful of. This means you must internalize that you will not always understand why someone else chooses to value something. I believe this is a part of empathy that often goes overlooked. This internalization frees you to become curious about who they are and implores you to learn their truth. 

I think this is particularly important in today's world where extreme ideas are celebrated. I am often wary of these as I believe they cannot encompass the whole truth in all of its nuance. These statemnts are constrained to a particular ideology, and do not allow room for intellectual freedom. This does not allow you to see someone else's truth as you are blinded by the cage, that suffocates you. In the context of what people hold, dear, I implore you to "catch what you do before you do what you can't catch”The Size of Dreams 

I believe that the strongest people are given the hardest challenges; and I often further this theory to claim that strong people often seek larger challenges to face the scary things in life so the people they love don't have to. This constant search for challenge is a manifestation of the size of your dreams. Those were the largest dreams often find sleep the least. 

In the context of dreams, I would like to address the conflation between imperfect results and wasted opportunities. Just because you did not hyper optimize a specific moment does not mean that you are somehow incapable of now accomplishing your goals.. I call this the fuzzy error bar effect where the optimal path between where you are now and your goal is a straight line, but most of the time we operate in between air bars. The irony, however, is that we experienced the most growth in these bars. I believe this is an unseen group as we do not recognize its influence until much later. 

The reason I specifically dictate the "size" of your dreams is that I believe he should not take advice from those who have smaller dreams for you than you do. What I mean by this, is you should not allow yourself to be limited by those who do not believe or see that which lies within you. I will caution that this does not mean to ignore anybody that offers words of comfort or a risk of her strategy. These people often care for you and want the best for you, but I employ you to utilize them as a source of strength, not a crutch. This will push you and surround you with a community of growth while also acknowledging those that care for you and want the best for you.  

Similarly, when others share their dreams with you, internalize that you may not comprehend their potential. Thus, take their vulnerability as an opportunity to help build their confidence. Tearing someone down with quick verbal jabs may feel good in the moment, but whats the point of using the liberties of free speech if you’re just going to propagate hate speech? Someone just shared with you their dreams, their reason for living, please do not use their vulnerability as an “opening”  or weakness. 

“Live a little” 

This phrase always cracks me up. Mostly because the habits and activities encompass by "live a little” or slowly kill you. Even for those not interested in an eternal pursuit of challenge must concede that life is simpler when hard work is frontloaded. By doing this, you are effectively buying yourself time later in your life as supposed to wasting in your life.

As an extension of this philosophy, I truly believe that deadweight can kill. This maps on to teaching the things you do, contact you are, people you spend time with influence who you become. But I also believe deadweight can be malicious in that no always seems to be dead. For example, if you want to get extremely good at a particular subject, you may need to spend less time on existing hobbies. Many will see this as a form of obsession and Lucie, this is what it takes to be the best in the world at something.

And while that's not my goal, I concede that there is always a "cool" project out there. Thus, if I am to accomplish that which I aspire to, I must focus myself away from any dead weight, even potentially interesting or fruitful endeavors that distract me from my imminent targets. 

Fun enough, I believe it is the unseen or subconscious deadweight that truly causes the most pain. It's the habits that we are already accustomed to performing as though they are ritual, which are the ones that can truly cost us. The I believe. Of conscientiousness can greatly aid us on the search for better habits. This does not mean to focus so much that you forget to enjoy the moment, however, it means being conscious of your actions as well as why you are performing them. I find that by simply asking the question why am I doing this? I am less privy to making decisions that I will later regret.








Power of 1

I believe people often undervalue how much impact their actions could have. For example, just smiling at someone, even if you've never met them before, can make that person stay better. This may be a negligible impact, however, it is still better. Like this there are many small, but good deeds I believe we can do to make the world a slightly happier place. I don't have any prescriptions as to how you should go about this, but I believe that by putting in just a little bit more effort, you can affect the world in your own way.

Furthering this idea of leveraging the "one more" mindset, I believe the same as true in regards to activation energy when times get tough. When you don't feel like doing something or even starting something often time is just giving yourself "one more" is enough to make real progress on something. This could be starting a habit, expressing your feelings for someone, pushing yourself on a difficult project, having a difficult conversation, etc.

This idea, while simple, incredibly difficult template. We often don't give one more because we feel as though we can't; however, I believe we have much more left in the tank so this week than we can ever imagine. I also think by focusing on the actionable tasks that our goals seem much more real. Otherwise, they endure as lofty illusions of the future.

Self-Sustaining Ecosystems 

Culture is often an overlooked paradigm when solving a problem. Specifically in social settings many look to a symptom of culture as the origin of occurrent issue. Lasting change requires a culture shift. This is also true in regards to lasting change you want to make yourself.

I'm not sure what else to say, solving the culture problem is incredibly difficult as every cases unique. You can convince people to either run towards something or away from something else. Different culture shifts work for different people and the question is how do you create a generalized solution to work on anyone and any shift. Maybe the answer to that question does not exist, but in my life I've seen that the only change that truly works stems from a culture shift towards a brighter future.

I caution those that choose to focus on stick rather than a carrot. By focusing on the stick, you often regard your past self or even current self as a pathetic excuse, as opposed to regarding you feature yourself as the light at the end of the tunnel, when focusing on the carrot. These para, I'm say the same thing and that you can be better than what you are now, but choose to use different focuses. And I believe someone that uses a positive source of motivation can help influence real positive impact in the world.






Bubbles Suffocate Us, the Fallacy of Tribalism

Bubbles of all kinds cloud our judgement because bubbles are of finite size. Yes, you can also say that bubbles pop and by popping stop, including our vision. The problem with this line of reasoning is that from the inside, there is no bubble because the bubble is all you know.

Beyond our individual Bubbles, I believe that there is a certain fallacy in tribalism. People assume that when you join a tribe, you join someone else's bubble, however, that cannot be true. Your bubble is a combination of all of your live experiences as well as your outlook on the future. This bubble is op change as you interact with other people however, your bubble is inherently unique as you are. Thus I believe there is a fallacy where people of certain tribes feel closer to one another just because they identify as the same tribe.
Do not assume you perfectly understand and can represent those in your bubble since there exist inherent differences that make you unique. This doesn't mean that you cannot relate better to someone else inside your bubble, it's simply means to not assume perfectly understanding another.tribe member . 



So, When Do You Stop? 

Seems like a fitting note to end on. 

Don’t really know to be honest, I guess that depends on you. 

I may be too young to say this, but I don’t think I ever will. Working with cool people on cool problems is what keeps me going so why would I? I have learned to adopt the mindset of “happy but not satisfied”. I internalize that I am enough and I hope that others find hapniess in thier lives; however, I concede that there is always somethihnng cool on the hoirzon, just waiting ot be run after. 

I also think the idea of “done” is a fallacy. There will always be something interesting that pops into your had and piques your interest, so why not run after it? Why hold yourself back just because you’re a fresh retiree? 

I think a better way to think about this is by including breaks. Whenever you feel yourself slowing down or dreading the work, just do something else for a bit. I assure you that if you had genuine passion for the original problem statement, you will be back sooner than you think grinding away on the project.

I want to end by saying that you are enough. You deserve happiness and love and all of the other warm, bubbly feelings that this world has to offer. Thank you for reading my words and I hope you learned or thoguhts about something deeply.  



